## Introduction

Knowledge graphs are a practical resource for a multitude of real world applications.
This resource utilizes graph theory to represent knowledge in the form of a graph.
Nodes represent entites and edges represent relational information between two entities (example shown in Figure {@fig:hetionet_schema}).

Typically, knowledge graphs are constructed via manually curated databases, but there are approaches that utilize natural language processing techniques for construction.
For example, one can construct a text mining system to detect sentneces that indicate a protein-protein interactions [@doi:10.1016/j.knosys.2018.11.020].
After the sentences have been identified, they are incorporated as evidence for establishing an edge in a knowledge graph.

Besides construction, knowledge graphs have been used in biomedical and non-biomedical applications (e.g. disease gene prioritization, social media mining, interpreting natural language, etc).
Regarding social media mining, tasks typically involve classifying new nodes [@arxiv:1101.3291] or creating a recommendation system [@doi:10.1145/3184558.3186904].
For interpreting natural language, researchers used a knowledge graph to design a question and answering system.
This systems interprets simple questions and uses relational information to provide answers [@arxiv:1404.4326; @doi:10.1145/3038912.3052675].
In a biomedical setting knowledge graphs have been used to prioritize genes relavant to disease [@pmid:21121028; @doi:10.1101/651000; @doi:10.1109/CIBCB.2019.8791472].

In this review we describe various approaches for constructing and applying knowledge graphs in a biomedical setting.
We discuss different ways to construct a knowledge graph ranging from using manually curated databases to text mining systems.
We also compare assorted approaches for applying knowledge graphs to solve biomedical problems.
Lastly, we conclude on the practicality of knowledge graphs and point out future applications that have yet to be explored.

![
A metagraph (schema) of the heterogeneous network used in the rephetio project [@doi:10.7554/eLife.26726].
This undirected network depicts pharmacological and biomedical information.
The nodes (circles) represent entities and edges (lines) depict  relational information between two entities.
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dhimmel/rephetio/f02d44fde7eeef0ffdca0800e0b43c48d800c86d/figure/metagraph.png){#fig:hetionet_schema}
